[Music]
Hello friends,
here we are going to discuss about the
art and techniques of film editing.
Film editing is a creative process of
assembling different parts of the shots
to create a narrative structure.
Film editing essentially has three major
parts.
One is selection of the right shot.
It often happens that the director is
not happy with what he has shot.
He may opt for other options like taking
the same action over and over again.
In that case, the editor's first job is
to select the right shot that is
required for the film.
The second job of the editor is to look
for the right portion of that right
shot.
While shooting, the director takes a
longer portion of the shot which is not
necessary in the film. The editor's job
is to select the right portion of that
shot and take the portion of the action
that is actually necessary.
The third part is the most challenging
part which is assembling these bits and
pieces into a narrative structure which
finally gives us the film that we see.
The famous film director Stanley Kubri
once said that film editing is perhaps
the only unique thing in film making
language which has got no resemblance
with any other art form.
It can make or break a film. Film
editing is definitely an art form
because the selection of the right
section of the shot does not only depend
on the technical qualities or
capabilities of the editor. It depends
on his understanding of the film
language, rhythm, pace and more
importantly character politics.
Unfortunately, it is also known that the
more invisible the art is in cinema,
the more better it becomes for the
editor.
So, a good film editor never gets the
acknowledgement from the audience
because it's not visible. It's called an
invisible art.
But people who actually know what an
editor goes through while making a film
would be able to appreciate the work
that a good editor has done in his film.
Let us now explore the different
techniques and styles that the editor
follows while making a film and as he
tells the story with images and sound.
The last decade of the 19th century saw
films which are singleshot films. Films
like train entering a station or workers
leaving a factory were considered to be
sensational films at that point of time.
These films if watched today would be
quite boring. But we can compare this
feeling of watching images and sound
with 3D technologies or 11.1 surround
immersive sound that we experience
today. Maybe 20 years down the line,
these films won't appeal to us as
sensational films.
[Music]
The first films that came in were not
stories. They were real images as in
images of real life happening in front
of the camera. The second attempt was
made to tell a story to the audience.
But these were long shots taken from a
distance. It was more or less like
watching a theater. A single shot where
everything was happening in front of the
camera.
Single shots then became two shots and
then became multi-reers.
But the essence of these films were told
by long shots only. So it was like
watching theater on film.
which changed in the next decade.
[Music]
In films like The Life of an American
Fireman and later in the great train
robbery, Edwin Porter thoroughly
established the effect of film editing
in cinema. In the film The Life of an
American Fireman, the story is quite
linear in structure. Linear in the sense
we have two stories happening parallelly
at two places. One is where the fire
broke out and second where the firemen
are trying to reach for rescue.
Later in many films we have seen that
these two scenes are often established
together so that the sense of suspense
and thrill is more and the audience is
more entertained.
But this effect was not utilized in this
film and the firemen reached the
location and then only we saw the girl
who was rescued.
[Music]
Crosscutting treatment was first seen in
the film The Great Train Robbery.
In the film The Great Train Robbery, we
find that the effect of crosscutting was
established
where the people who would finally
rescue the thing that was stolen from
the train and the burglars. These two
sequences were crosscut with each other
to give the sense of parallel cutting
and to evoke the sense of suspense and
thrill.
[Music]
Almost a decade later, DW Griffith's
film, The Birth of a Nation, proved
something very different as far as film
editing was concerned.
In this film, he first established the
effect of dramatic emphasis.
So far we were watching films which are
long shots taken from a distance. The
camera always was in the position of an
observer from a distance and never used
to get into the closer shots.
But in this film we see that the
director wanted to confine the look of
the audience within the space where the
drama is actually happening.
The shots of expressions, the shots of
significant elements within the frame
was established.
These shots were put together and the
film actually established what dramatic
emphasis was all about.
[Music]
Hallelujah.
As the language of film editing
developed both in America and Russia,
Russian filmmakers like Leif Kullesov,
Pudovkin and later Sergey Eisenstein
developed newer methods of telling
stories.
Le Kullesov was one of the film
directors who experimented with shots.
Shots which do not actually relate with
each other but when put together give a
different meaning.
This was followed by the famous
experiment now known as the Kulashov
experiment.
In this experiment, he used the face of
an expressionless actor.
This face was then juxtaposed with three
different shots. One was the shot of a
soup bowl.
The second one was the shot of a woman
in a coffin. And the third one was the
shot of a young girl.
These three options were shown to the
audience.
The audience highly appreciated the
actor's performance.
They said that in the first
shot the actor looked hungry.
They also said in the second shot the
actor looked mournful
in the shot where they saw the shot of
the coffin.
In the third case, the audience said
that the actor had an expression of
lust.
But as a matter of fact, in all three
cases, the expression of the actor was
the same.
This definitely proved that by placing
shots one after the other, the editor
can change the meaning of the previous
shot and two shots put together can mean
something very different from the shot
itself. The kulles of experiment is
still valid. Now the experiment gave the
editor the option of recreating reality
because with this option the editor can
randomly place any shot after any shot
and recreate something which was not
there in the independent shots.
Later film editing also wanted to prove
that emotions can be narrated through
images.
We have seen this happen in films like
mother by pudovkin.
Here internal emotions like happiness,
sadness were expressed with images of
nature.
Even the images of destruction was
juxtaposed with shots of actual
destruction happening mentally.
These tools form the basic editing tools
for the editor. The editor can now
recreate what they want with images
which are not meant for that.
With the experiments done by film
directors like Sergey Eisenstein, film
language got an importance in the arena
of film making.
Film editing is now not only joining
actions or narrative portions within the
film. Film editing now meant saying
seeing something else.
Sergey Eisenstein developed the theories
of montage.
Montage is a French term which actually
means assembling
unlike editing which means reducing
something from the main body of work.
Sergey Eisenstein formulated five kinds
of montage theories.
The first one was called metric montage.
Metric montage means where shots are cut
into pieces of the same length and
joined with each other.
Metric montage does not necessarily mean
that you are trying to say something
with the images. The equal length shots
has got an effect on screen and that is
what was experimented with this montage
theory.
The second montage was rhythmic montage.
Rhythmic montage was a step ahead of
metric montage.
With rhythmic montage, the happenings
inside the frame now became important.
The shot inherently has got a rhythm and
shots of the same rhythm were juxtaposed
with each other giving the sense of what
is called rhythmic montage.
The third kind of montage is called the
tonal montage. Tonal montage is actually
a combination of rhythmic and
metric montage.
The fourth one was called overtonal
montage. And the fifth one and the most
important one was called the
intellectual montage.
Intellectual montage in a way also
proved that film editing can say
something in the film which is very
different from the images. Intellectual
montage also proved that two shots can
give rise to a third meaning.
Two shots may complement each other. Two
shots may conflict with each other and
give a third meaning. This was also
called the thesis versus anti-thesis
giving a synthesis.
This intellectual theory of montage was
exploited by many directors and it's
still part of film editing in the
present age.
[Music]
The work of directors that we explained
so far is somehow reflected in all the
films that we see nowadays.
All the films are indebted to the works
and experiments done by the Russian
filmmakers and the early American
filmmakers.
In the coming episodes, we'll see how a
cut fade dissolves and all these tools
for editing that we often see in cinema
actually work in the language of film
making.
[Music]